# Kamin Horvath

## Resume

This is a truncated version of my full resume, available on my Gitlab repository.

### Objective

To expand on my experience and continue to grow my skillset in project man-
agement, sales, and technical knowledge in the mechanical contracting and HVAC
industry.

### Experience

Project Estimator - ABM (June 2023 - Present)
* Surveying and estimating commercial, public, and industrial HVAC projects throughout the Southeast.
* Experience in helping to design solutions and systems for new and retrofit mechanical HVAC projects.
* Ability to coordinate and organize projects with a wide variety of teams, including sales, project management, vendors, subcontractors, and customers

Business Development Manager - ABM (February 2022 - June 2023)
* Scouting, estimating, and selling mechanical contracting projects and main-
tenance agreements to commercial customers.
* In addition to core business, also assisted in selling other ABM units such as
electrical, EV charging, and janitorial.
* Role includes growing new business as well as expanding offerings to existing
ABM customers

Assistant Project Manager - Maxair Mechanical (February 2020 - February 2022)
* Selling, estimating, and managing mechanical contracting project as part of
Direct for Owner (DFO) team.
* Primarily selling and running jobs directly for end clients, where Maxair is
the general contractor.
* Responsible for managing projects from pre-construction to completion.
* Coordination of all parts of the job including equipment, labor, subcontrac-
tors, scheduling, permitting, and startup.
* Experience in working with contractors, clients, engineers, and manufacturers.

Technical Engineering Sales Support - James M. Pleasants Company (May 2015 - February 2020)
* Duties included sizing hydronic equipment for engineers, and performing me-
chanical takeoffs and quotes for contractors.
* Responsible for assembling and pricing the majority of design build and plan
and spec projects for Georgia territory.
* Scope of successful proposals ranged up to several million dollars worth of
material.

### Education
B.Sc., Mechanical Engineering - Virginia Tech (May 2015)
* Designed, constructed, and tested a portable dental chair as part of a senior
design group project, coordinating with the University at Buffalo School of
Dental Medicine's community outreach program
